# Application of Cubical Homology on the example of Ultrasound Breast Cancer Images

## Cubical Homology and Persistent Barcodes

I hope you now have some vague understanding of the Cubical Homology of a binary image and how we can transform a grayscale image into a binary one. Again, there exist several different filtration functions, which we will not go into detail about just yet. For now, we will focus our attention on the case of simple grayscale intensity: if the grayscale value of a pixel is less than a chosen threshold $\tau$, it is turned black; otherwise, it is white.  

Consider the simple grayscale image below.  

By increasing the threshold value $\tau$ from $0$ to $1$, we create a binary image for each threshold. If the grayscale value of a pixel $g(p)$ satisfies $g(p) < \tau$, then the pixel turns black; otherwise, it turns white. As $\tau$ increases, more black pixels cover the image, and the topology (i.e., the number of connected components and holes) changes. For example, when $\tau = 0.1$, we have $4$ connected components and no holes. But once $\tau = 0.6$, there is one connected component and exactly one hole.  

As we continuously increase $\tau$, connected components appear and disappear, and so do $1$-dimensional holes. We say that a topological cavity (connected component or hole) is **born** at the threshold value (time $t$) when it first appears, and it **dies** when it either merges with another topological cavity of the same kind (connected component or hole, respectively) or disappears entirely. This process can be captured using **Persistent Barcodes**, where each bar represents a topological cavity from the moment it is born to the moment it dies.  

**Figure 3** illustrates this process. The top and bottom panels show binary images of the same object at different threshold values $\tau \in [0,1]$. At low thresholds (e.g., $\tau = 0.1$), 4 connected component are visible, that's why we can see 4 blue bars *alive* at this moment. 
several disconnected components are visible. As  $\tau$ continuously increasing, the connected components are slowly merging with each other, so by the time  $\tau = 0.6$ we have exactly one connected component which will never die. Notice that at  $\tau=0.6$ we also have a single hole left, so which is represented by an orange bar. It is not going to be filled till  $\tau = 0.8$, then the topological cavt=ity representing this hole finally dies. 

The middle panel shows the **persistent barcode**, where the $x$-axis corresponds to the filtration value (threshold $\tau$) and each horizontal bar represents the lifespan of a topological feature. Blue bars correspond to $H_0$ homology classes (connected components, $\beta_0$), while the orange bar corresponds to an $H_1$ homology class (a hole, $\beta_1$). Vertical lines link specific threshold values to the corresponding binary images.  
